# Chapter 4
# RISC-V Debug

<!-- page 49 -->

Modifications to the RISC-V core to support debug are kept to a minimum. There is a special execution mode (Debug Mode) and a few extra CSRs. The DM takes care of the rest.

In order to be compliant with this specification an implementation must implement everything described in this section that is not explicitly listed as optional.

## 4.1 Debug Mode

Debug Mode is a special processor mode used only when a hart is halted for external debugging. How Debug Mode is implemented is not specified here.

When executing code from the optional Program Buffer, the hart stays in Debug Mode and the following apply:

1. All operations are executed at machine mode privilege level, except that MPRV in mstatus may be ignored according to mprven.
2. All interrupts (including NMI) are masked.
3. Exceptions don't update any registers. That includes cause, epc, tval, dpc, and mstatus. They do end execution of the Program Buffer.
4. No action is taken if a trigger matches.
5. Counters may be stopped, depending on stopcount in dcsr.
6. Timers may be stopped, depending on stoptime in dcsr.
7. The wfi instruction acts as a nop.
8. Almost all instructions that change the privilege level have undefined behavior. This includes ecall, mret, sret, and uret. (To change the privilege level, the debugger can write prv in dcsr). The only exception is ebreak. When that is executed in Debug Mode, it halts the hart again but without updating dpc or dcsr.
9. Completing Program Buffer execution is considered output for the purpose of fence instructions.
10. All control transfer instructions may act as illegal instructions if their destination is in the Program Buffer. If one such instruction acts as an illegal instruction, all such instructions must act as an illegal instruction.

<!-- page 50 -->

11. All control transfer instructions may act as illegal instructions if their destination is outside the Program Buffer. If one such instruction acts as an illegal instruction, all such instructions must act as an illegal instruction.
12. Instructions that depend on the value of the PC (e.g. auipc) may act as illegal instructions.
13. Effective XLEN is DXLEN.

*In general, the debugger is expected to be able to simulate all the effects of MPRV. The exception is the case of Sv32 systems, which need MPRV functionality in order to access 34-bit physical addresses. Other systems are likely to tie mprven to 0.*

## 4.2 Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions

The reservation registered by an lr instruction on a memory address may be lost when entering Debug Mode or while in Debug Mode. This means that there may be no forward progress if Debug Mode is entered between lr and sc pairs.

*This is a behavior that debug users must be aware of. If they have a breakpoint set between a lr and sc pair, or are stepping through such code, the sc may never succeed. Fortunately in general use there will be very few instructions in such a sequence, and anybody debugging it will quickly notice that the reservation is not occurring. The solution in that case is to set a breakpoint on the first instruction after the sc and run to it. A higher level debugger may choose to automate this.*

## 4.3 Wait for Interrupt Instruction

If halt is requested while wfi is executing, then the hart must leave the stalled state, completing this instruction's execution, and then enter Debug Mode.

## 4.4 Single Step

A debugger can cause a halted hart to execute a single instruction and then re-enter Debug Mode by setting step before setting resumereq.

If executing or fetching that instruction causes an exception, Debug Mode is re-entered immediately after the PC is changed to the exception handler and the appropriate tval and cause registers are updated.

If executing or fetching the instruction causes a trigger to fire, Debug Mode is re-entered immediately after that trigger has fired. In that case cause is set to 2 (trigger) instead of 4 (single step). Whether the instruction is executed or not depends on the specific configuration of the trigger.

If the instruction that is executed causes the PC to change to an address where an instruction fetch causes an exception, that exception does not occur until the next time the hart is resumed.

<!-- page 51 -->

Similarly, a trigger at the new address does not fire until the hart actually attempts to execute that instruction.

If the instruction being stepped over is wfi and would normally stall the hart, then instead the instruction is treated as nop.

## 4.5 Reset

If the halt signal (driven by the hart's halt request bit in the Debug Module) or resethaltreq are asserted when a hart comes out of reset, the hart must enter Debug Mode before executing any instructions, but after performing any initialization that would usually happen before the first instruction is executed.

## 4.6 dret Instruction

To return from Debug Mode, a new instruction is defined: dret. It has an encoding of 0x7b200073. On harts which support this instruction, executing dret in Debug Mode changes pc to the value stored in dpc. The current privilege level is changed to that specified by prv in dcsr. The hart is no longer in debug mode.

Executing dret outside of Debug Mode causes an illegal instruction exception.

It is not necessary for the debugger to know whether an implementation supports dret, as the Debug Module will ensure that it is executed if necessary. It is defined in this specification only to reserve the opcode and allow for reusable Debug Module implementations.

## 4.7 XLEN

While in Debug Mode, XLEN is DXLEN. It is up to the debugger to determine the XLEN during normal program execution (by looking at misa) and to clearly communicate this to the user.

## 4.8 Core Debug Registers

The supported Core Debug Registers must be implemented for each hart that can be debugged. They are CSRs, accessible using the RISC-V csr opcodes and optionally also using abstract debug commands.

These registers are only accessible from Debug Mode.

### Table 4.1: Core Debug Registers

| Address | Name | Page |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0x7b0 | Debug Control and Status (dcsr) | 42 |
| 0x7b1 | Debug PC (dpc) | 44 |
| 0x7b2 | Debug Scratch Register 0 (dscratch0) | 45 |
| 0x7b3 | Debug Scratch Register 1 (dscratch1) | 45 |

### 4.8.1 Debug Control and Status (dcsr, at 0x7b0)

*cause priorities are assigned such that the least predictable events have the highest priority.*

| Bits | Field |
| --- | --- |
| 31:28 | xdebugver |
| 27:16 | 0 |
| 15 | ebreakm |
| 14 | 0 |
| 13 | ebreaks |
| 12 | ebreaku |
| 11 | stepie |
| 10 | stopcount |
| 9 | stoptime |
| 8:6 | cause |
| 5 | 0 |
| 4 | mprven |
| 3 | nmip |
| 2 | step |
| 1:0 | prv |

| Field | Description | Access | Reset |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| xdebugver | 0: There is no external debug support.<br>4: External debug support exists as it is described in this document.<br>15: There is external debug support, but it does not conform to any available version of this spec. | R | Preset |
| ebreakm | 0: ebreak instructions in M-mode behave as described in the Privileged Spec.<br>1: ebreak instructions in M-mode enter Debug Mode. | R/W | 0 |
| ebreaks | 0: ebreak instructions in S-mode behave as described in the Privileged Spec.<br>1: ebreak instructions in S-mode enter Debug Mode. | R/W | 0 |
| ebreaku | 0: ebreak instructions in U-mode behave as described in the Privileged Spec.<br>1: ebreak instructions in U-mode enter Debug Mode. | R/W | 0 |
| stepie | 0: Interrupts are disabled during single stepping.<br>1: Interrupts are enabled during single stepping.<br>Implementations may hard wire this bit to 0. In that case interrupt behavior can be emulated by the debugger.<br>The debugger must not change the value of this bit while the hart is running. | WARL | 0 |

<!-- page 52 -->

| Field | Description | Access | Reset |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| stopcount | 0: Increment counters as usual.<br>1: Don't increment any counters while in Debug Mode or on ebreak instructions that cause entry into Debug Mode. These counters include the cycle and instret CSRs. This is preferred for most debugging scenarios.<br>An implementation may hardwire this bit to 0 or 1. | WARL | Preset |
| stoptime | 0: Increment timers as usual.<br>1: Don't increment any hart-local timers while in Debug Mode.<br>An implementation may hardwire this bit to 0 or 1. | WARL | Preset |
| cause | Explains why Debug Mode was entered.<br>When there are multiple reasons to enter Debug Mode in a single cycle, hardware should set cause to the cause with the highest priority.<br>1: An ebreak instruction was executed. (priority 3)<br>2: The Trigger Module caused a breakpoint exception. (priority 4, highest)<br>3: The debugger requested entry to Debug Mode using haltreq. (priority 1)<br>4: The hart single stepped because step was set. (priority 0, lowest)<br>5: The hart halted directly out of reset due to resethaltreq. It is also acceptable to report 3 when this happens. (priority 2)<br>Other values are reserved for future use. | R | 0 |
| mprven | 0: MPRV in mstatus is ignored in Debug Mode.<br>1: MPRV in mstatus takes effect in Debug Mode.<br>Implementing this bit is optional. It may be tied to either 0 or 1. | WARL | Preset |
| nmip | When set, there is a Non-Maskable-Interrupt (NMI) pending for the hart.<br>Since an NMI can indicate a hardware error condition, reliable debugging may no longer be possible once this bit becomes set. This is implementation-dependent. | R | 0 |

<!-- page 53 -->

| Field | Description | Access | Reset |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| step | When set and not in Debug Mode, the hart will only execute a single instruction and then enter Debug Mode. If the instruction does not complete due to an exception, the hart will immediately enter Debug Mode before executing the trap handler, with appropriate exception registers set. The debugger must not change the value of this bit while the hart is running. | R/W | 0 |
| prv | Contains the privilege level the hart was operating in when Debug Mode was entered. The encoding is described in Table 4.5, and matches the privilege level encoding from the Privileged Spec. A debugger can change this value to change the hart's privilege level when exiting Debug Mode.<br>Not all privilege levels are supported on all harts. If the encoding written is not supported or the debugger is not allowed to change to it, the hart may change to any supported privilege level. | R/W | 3 |

<!-- page 54 -->

### 4.8.2 Debug PC (dpc, at 0x7b1)

Upon entry to debug mode, dpc is updated with the virtual address of the next instruction to be executed. The behavior is described in more detail in Table 4.3.

### Table 4.3: Virtual address in DPC upon Debug Mode Entry

| Cause | Virtual Address in DPC |
| --- | --- |
| ebreak | Address of the ebreak instruction |
| single step | Address of the instruction that would be executed next if no debugging was going on. Ie. pc + 4 for 32-bit instructions that don't change program flow, the destination PC on taken jumps/branches, etc. |
| trigger module | If timing is 0, the address of the instruction which caused the trigger to fire. If timing is 1, the address of the next instruction to be executed at the time that debug mode was entered. |
| halt request | Address of the next instruction to be executed at the time that debug mode was entered |

When resuming, the hart's PC is updated to the virtual address stored in dpc. A debugger may write dpc to change where the hart resumes.

<!-- page 55 -->

```text
DXLEN-1                                0
+--------------------------------------+
|                 dpc                  |
+--------------------------------------+
```

### 4.8.3 Debug Scratch Register 0 (dscratch0, at 0x7b2)

Optional scratch register that can be used by implementations that need it. A debugger must not write to this register unless hartinfo explicitly mentions it (the Debug Module may use this register internally).

### 4.8.4 Debug Scratch Register 1 (dscratch1, at 0x7b3)

Optional scratch register that can be used by implementations that need it. A debugger must not write to this register unless hartinfo explicitly mentions it (the Debug Module may use this register internally).

## 4.9 Virtual Debug Registers

A virtual register is one that doesn't exist directly in the hardware, but that the debugger exposes as if it does. Debug software should implement them, but hardware can skip this section. Virtual registers exist to give users access to functionality that's not part of standard debuggers without requiring them to carefully modify debug registers while the debugger is also accessing those same registers.

### Table 4.4: Virtual Core Debug Registers

| Address | Name | Page |
| --- | --- | --- |
| virtual | Privilege Level (prv) | 45 |

### 4.9.1 Privilege Level (prv, at virtual)

Users can read this register to inspect the privilege level that the hart was running in when the hart halted. Users can write this register to change the privilege level that the hart will run in when it resumes.

This register contains prv from dcsr, but in a place that the user is expected to access. The user should not access dcsr directly, because doing so might interfere with the debugger.

```text
1   0
+-----+
| prv |
+-----+
  2
```

<!-- page 56 -->

### Table 4.5: Privilege Level Encoding

| Encoding | Privilege Level |
| --- | --- |
| 0 | User/Application |
| 1 | Supervisor |
| 3 | Machine |
