<!-- Page 16 -->

## 2.2. Supervisor-level CSRs

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x104 | SRW | 64 | `sie` | Supervisor interrupt-enable bits |
| 0x144 | SRW | 64 | `sip` | Supervisor interrupt-pending bits |
| 0x15C | SRW | SXLEN | `stopei` | Supervisor top external interrupt (only with an IMSIC) |
| 0xDB0 | SRO | SXLEN | `stopi` | Supervisor top interrupt |

### Supervisor-Level High-Half CSRs (RV32 only)

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x114 | SRW | 32 | `sieh` | Upper 32 bits of `sie` |
| 0x154 | SRW | 32 | `siph` | Upper 32 bits of `sip` |

The space of registers accessible through the `siselect`/`sireg` window is separate from but parallels that of machine level, being for supervisor-level interrupts instead of machine-level interrupts. The subranges of values used for `siselect` are once again these:

```text
0x30-0x3F  major interrupt priorities
0x70-0xFF  external interrupts (only with an IMSIC)
```

For maximum compatibility, it is recommended that `siselect` support at least a 9-bit range, 0 to 0x1FF, regardless of whether an IMSIC exists.

> Because the VS CSR `vsiselect` (Section 2.3) always has at least 9 bits, and like other VS CSRs, `vsiselect` substitutes for `siselect` when executing in a virtual machine (VS-mode or VU-mode), implementing a smaller range for `siselect` allows software to discover it is not running in a virtual machine.

Like `miselect`, values of `siselect` with the most-significant bit set (bit XLEN - 1 = 1) are designated for custom use. If XLEN changes, the most-significant bit of `siselect` moves to the new position, retaining its value from before. An implementation is not required to support any custom values for `siselect`.

Other `siselect` values are reserved for other RISC-V extensions.

> At supervisor level, extension Sscsrind generalizes the mechanism of indirect register access provided by `siselect` and `sireg`, as well as the parallel at VS-level provided by `vsiselect` and `vsireg`, described in the next subsection.

Note that the widths of `siselect` and `sireg` are always the current XLEN rather than SXLEN. Hence, for example, if MXLEN = 64 and SXLEN = 32, then these registers are 64 bits when the current privilege mode is M (running RV64 code) but 32 bits when the privilege mode is S (RV32 code).

CSR `stopei` is described with the IMSIC in Chapter 3.

Register `stopi` reports the highest-priority interrupt that is pending and enabled for supervisor level, as specified in Section 5.4.2.

If extension Sscsrind is also implemented, then when `siselect` has a value in the range 0x30-0x3F or 0x70-0xFF, attempts to access alias CSRs `sireg2` through `sireg6` raise an illegal instruction exception (unless executing in a virtual machine, covered in the next section).

<!-- Page 17 -->

## 2.3. Hypervisor and VS CSRs

If a hart implements the H extension, then the hypervisor and VS CSRs listed in Table 5 are also either added or widened to 64 bits.

The new hypervisor CSRs in the table (`hvien`, `hvictl`, `hviprio1`, and `hviprio2`) augment `hvip` for injecting interrupts into VS level. The use of these registers is covered in Chapter 6 on interrupts for virtual machines.

The new VS CSRs (`vsiselect`, `vsireg`, `vstopei`, and `vstopi`) all match supervisor CSRs, and substitute for those supervisor CSRs when executing in a virtual machine (in VS-mode or VU-mode).

CSR `vsiselect` is required to support at least a 9-bit range of 0 to 0x1FF, whether or not an IMSIC is implemented. As with `siselect`, values of `vsiselect` with the most-significant bit set (bit XLEN - 1 = 1) are designated for custom use. If XLEN changes, the most-significant bit of `vsiselect` moves to the new position, retaining its value from before.

Like `siselect` and `sireg`, the widths of `vsiselect` and `vsireg` are always the current XLEN rather than VSXLEN. Hence, for example, if HSXLEN = 64 and VSXLEN = 32, then these registers are 64 bits when accessed by a hypervisor in HS-mode (running RV64 code) but 32 bits for a guest OS in VS-mode (RV32 code).

*Table 5. Hypervisor and VS CSRs added or widened by the Advanced Interrupt Architecture. (Parameter HSXLEN is just another name for SXLEN for hypervisor-extended S-mode).* 

#### Delegated and Virtual Interrupts, Interrupt Priorities, for VS Level

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x603 | HRW | 64 | `hideleg` | Hypervisor interrupt delegation |
| 0x608 | HRW | 64 | `hvien` | Hypervisor virtual interrupt enables |
| 0x609 | HRW | HSXLEN | `hvictl` | Hypervisor virtual interrupt control |
| 0x645 | HRW | 64 | `hvip` | Hypervisor virtual interrupt-pending bits |
| 0x646 | HRW | 64 | `hviprio1` | Hypervisor VS-level interrupt priorities |
| 0x647 | HRW | 64 | `hviprio2` | Hypervisor VS-level interrupt priorities |

#### VS-Level Window to Indirectly Accessed Registers

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x250 | HRW | XLEN | `vsiselect` | Virtual supervisor indirect register select |
| 0x251 | HRW | XLEN | `vsireg` | Virtual supervisor indirect register alias |

#### VS-Level Interrupts

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x204 | HRW | 64 | `vsie` | Virtual supervisor interrupt-enable bits |
| 0x244 | HRW | 64 | `vsip` | Virtual supervisor interrupt-pending bits |
| 0x25C | HRW | VSXLEN | `vstopei` | Virtual supervisor top external interrupt (only with an IMSIC) |
| 0xEB0 | HRO | VSXLEN | `vstopi` | Virtual supervisor top interrupt |

#### Hypervisor and VS-Level High-Half CSRs (RV32 only)

<!-- Page 18 -->

| Number | Privilege | Width | Name | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x613 | HRW | 32 | `hidelegh` | Upper 32 bits of `hideleg` |
| 0x618 | HRW | 32 | `hvienh` | Upper 32 bits of `hvien` |
| 0x655 | HRW | 32 | `hviph` | Upper 32 bits of `hvip` |
| 0x656 | HRW | 32 | `hviprio1h` | Upper 32 bits of `hviprio1` |
| 0x657 | HRW | 32 | `hviprio2h` | Upper 32 bits of `hviprio2` |
| 0x214 | HRW | 32 | `vsieh` | Upper 32 bits of `vsie` |
| 0x254 | HRW | 32 | `vsiph` | Upper 32 bits of `vsip` |

The space of registers selectable by `vsiselect` is more limited than for machine and supervisor levels:

```text
0x030-0x03F  inaccessible
0x070-0x0FF  external interrupts (IMSIC only), or inaccessible
```

Other `vsiselect` values are reserved for other RISC-V extensions.

For alias CSRs `sireg` and `vsireg`, the H extension’s usual rules for when to raise a virtual instruction exception (based on whether an instruction is HS-qualified) are not applicable. The rules given in this section for `sireg` and `vsireg` apply instead, unless overridden by the requirements of Section 2.5, which take precedence over this section when extension Smstateen is also implemented.

A virtual instruction exception is raised for attempts from VS-mode or VU-mode to directly access `vsireg`, or attempts from VU-mode to access `sireg`.

When `vsiselect` has the number of an inaccessible register, attempts from M-mode or HS-mode to access `vsireg` raise an illegal instruction exception, and attempts from VS-mode to access `sireg` (really `vsireg`) raise a virtual instruction exception.

> Requiring a range of 0-0x1FF for `vsiselect`, even though most or all of the space is reserved or inaccessible, permits a hypervisor to emulate indirectly accessed registers in the implemented range, including registers that are not currently defined but may be standardized in the future.

The indirectly accessed registers for external interrupts (numbers 0x70-0xFF) are accessible only when field VGEIN of `hstatus` is the number of an implemented guest external interrupt, not zero. If VGEIN is not the number of an implemented guest external interrupt (including the case when no IMSIC is implemented), then all indirect register numbers in the ranges 0x030-0x03F and 0x070-0x0FF designate an inaccessible register at VS level.

Along the same lines, when `hstatus.VGEIN` is not the number of an implemented guest external interrupt, attempts from M-mode or HS-mode to access CSR `vstopei` raise an illegal instruction exception, and attempts from VS-mode to access `stopei` raise a virtual instruction exception.

If extension Sscsrind is also implemented, then when `vsiselect` has a value in the range 0x30-0x3F or 0x70-0xFF, attempts from M-mode or HS-mode to access alias CSRs `vsireg2` through `vsireg6` raise an illegal instruction exception, and attempts from VS-mode to access `sireg2` through `sireg6` raise a virtual instruction exception.

## 2.4. Virtual instruction exceptions

Following the default rules for the H extension, attempts from VS-mode to directly access a hypervisor or VS CSR other than `vsireg`, or from VU-mode to access any supervisor-level CSR (including hypervisor and VS CSRs) other than `sireg` or `vsireg`, usually raise not an illegal instruction exception but instead a virtual instruction exception. For details, see the H extension documentation.

Instructions that read/write CSR `stopei` or `vstopei` are considered to be HS-qualified unless all of following are true: the hart has an IMSIC, extension Smstateen is implemented, and bit 58 of `mstateen0` is zero. (See the next section, Section 2.5, about `mstateen0`.)

For `sireg` and `vsireg`, see both the previous section, Section 2.3, and the next, Section 2.5, for when a virtual instruction exception is required instead of an illegal instruction exception.

## 2.5. Access control by the state-enable CSRs

If extension Smstateen is implemented together with the Advanced Interrupt Architecture (AIA), three bits of state-enable register `mstateen0` control access to AIA-added state from privilege modes less privileged than M-mode:

```text
bit 60 CSRIND: CSRs `siselect`, `sireg`, `vsiselect`, and `vsireg`
bit 59 AIA: all other state added by the AIA and not controlled by bits CSRIND and IMSIC
bit 58 IMSIC: all IMSIC state, including CSRs `stopei` and `vstopei`
```

If one of these bits is zero in `mstateen0`, an attempt to access the corresponding state from a privilege mode less privileged than M-mode results in an illegal instruction trap. As always, the state-enable CSRs do not affect the accessibility of any state when in M-mode, only in less privileged modes. For more explanation, see the documentation for extension Smstateen.

The AIA bit controls access to AIA CSRs `siph`, `sieh`, `stopi`, `hidelegh`, `hvien`/`hvienh`, `hviph`, `hvictl`, `hviprio1`/`hviprio1h`, `hviprio2`/`hviprio2h`, `vsiph`, `vsieh`, and `vstopi`, as well as to the supervisor-level interrupt priorities accessed through `siselect` + `sireg` (the `iprio` array of Section 5.4.1).

The IMSIC bit is implemented in `mstateen0` only if the hart has an IMSIC. If the H extension is also implemented, this bit does not affect the behavior or accessibility of hypervisor CSRs `hgeip` and `hgeie`, or field VGEIN of `hstatus`. In particular, guest external interrupts from an IMSIC continue to be visible to HS-mode in `hgeip` even when `mstateen0.IMSIC` is zero.

> An earlier, pre-ratification draft of Smstateen said that when `mstateen0.IMSIC` is zero, registers `hgeip` and `hgeie` and field VGEIN of `hstatus` are all read-only zeros. That effect is no longer correct.

If the hart does not have an IMSIC, the IMSIC bit of `mstateen0` is read-only zero, but Smstateen has no effect on attempts to access the nonexistent IMSIC state.

> This means in particular that, when the hart does not have an IMSIC, the following raise a virtual instruction exception as described in Table 5, not an illegal instruction exception, despite that `mstateen0.IMSIC` is zero:
>
> - attempts from VS-mode to access `sireg` (really `vsireg`) while `vsiselect` has a value in the range 0x70–0xFF; and
> - attempts from VS-mode to access `stopei` (really `vstopei`).

If the CSRIND bit of `mstateen0` is one, then regardless of any other `mstateen` bits (including the AIA and IMSIC bits of `mstateen0`), a virtual instruction exception is raised as described in Section 2.3 for all attempts from VS-mode or VU-mode to directly access `vsireg`, and for all attempts from VU-mode to access `sireg`. This behavior is overridden only when `mstateen0.CSRIND` is zero.

If the H extension is implemented, the same three bits are defined also in hypervisor CSR `hstateen0` but concern only the state potentially accessible to a virtual machine executing in privilege modes VS and VU:

```text
bit 60 CSRIND: CSRs `siselect` and `sireg` (really `vsiselect` and `vsireg`)
bit 59 AIA: CSRs `siph` and `sieh` (RV32 only) and `stopi` (really `vsiph`, `vsieh`, and `vstopi`)
bit 58 IMSIC: all state of IMSIC guest interrupt files, including CSR `stopei` (really `vstopei`)
```

If one of these bits is zero in `hstateen0`, and the same bit is one in `mstateen0`, then an attempt to access the corresponding state from VS or VU-mode raises a virtual instruction exception. (But note that, for high-half CSRs `siph` and `sieh`, this applies only when XLEN = 32. When XLEN > 32, an attempt to access `siph` or `sieh` raises an illegal instruction exception as usual, not a virtual instruction exception.)

If the CSRIND bit is one in `mstateen0` but is zero in `hstateen0`, then all attempts from VS or VU-mode to access `siselect` or `sireg` raise a virtual instruction exception, not an illegal instruction exception, regardless of the value of `vsiselect` or any other `mstateen` bits.

The IMSIC bit is implemented in `hstateen0` only if the hart has an IMSIC. Furthermore, even with an IMSIC, `hstateen0.IMSIC` may (or may not) be read-only zero if the IMSIC has no guest interrupt files for guest external interrupts (Chapter 3). When this bit is zero (whether read-only zero or set to zero), a virtual machine is prevented from accessing the hart’s IMSIC the same as when `hstatus.VGEIN = 0`.

Extension Ssstateen is defined as the supervisor-level view of Smstateen. Therefore, the combination of Ssaia and Ssstateen incorporates the bits defined above for `hstateen0` but not those for `mstateen0`, since machine-level CSRs are not visible to supervisor level.

<!-- Page 19 -->

# Chapter 3. Incoming MSI Controller (IMSIC)

## 3.1. Interrupt files and interrupt identities

An Incoming MSI Controller (IMSIC) is an optional RISC-V hardware component that is closely coupled with a hart, one IMSIC per hart. An IMSIC receives and records incoming message-signaled interrupts (MSIs) for a hart, and signals to the hart when there are pending and enabled interrupts to be serviced.

An IMSIC has one or more memory-mapped registers in the machine’s address space for receiving MSIs. Aside from those memory-mapped registers, software interacts with an IMSIC primarily through several RISC-V CSRs at the attached hart.

In a RISC-V system, MSIs are directed not just to a specific hart but to a specific privilege level of a specific hart, such as machine or supervisor level. Furthermore, when a hart implements the H extension, an IMSIC may optionally allow MSIs to be directed to a specific virtual hart at virtual supervisor level (VS level).

For each privilege level and each virtual hart to which MSIs may be directed at a hart, the hart’s IMSIC contains a separate interrupt file. Assuming a hart implements supervisor mode, its IMSIC has at least two interrupt files, one for machine level and the other for supervisor level. When a hart also implements the H extension, its IMSIC may have additional interrupt files for virtual harts, called guest interrupt files. The number of guest interrupt files an IMSIC has for virtual harts is exactly GEILEN, the number of supported guest external interrupts, as defined by the H extension.

Each individual interrupt file consists mainly of two arrays of bits of the same size, one array for recording MSIs that have arrived but are not yet serviced (interrupt-pending bits), and the other array for specifying which interrupts the hart will currently accept (interrupt-enable bits). Each bit position in the two arrays corresponds with a different interrupt identity number by which MSIs from different sources are distinguished at an interrupt file. Because an IMSIC is the external interrupt controller for a hart, an interrupt file’s interrupt identities become the minor identities for external interrupts at the attached hart.

The number of interrupt identities supported by an interrupt file (and hence the number of active bits in each array) is one less than a multiple of 64, and may be a minimum of 63 and a maximum of 2047.

> Platform standards may increase the minimum number of interrupt identities that must be implemented by each interrupt file.

When an interrupt file supports N distinct interrupt identities, valid identity numbers are between 1 and N inclusive. The identity numbers within this range are said to be implemented by the interrupt file; numbers outside this range are not implemented. The number zero is never a valid interrupt identity.

IMSIC hardware does not assume any connection between the interrupt identity numbers at one interrupt file and those at another interrupt file. Software is commonly expected to assign the same interrupt identity number to different MSI sources at different interrupt files, without coordination across interrupt files. Thus the total number of MSI sources that can be separately distinguished within a system is potentially the product of the number of interrupt identities at a single interrupt file times the total number of interrupt files in the system, over all harts.

<!-- Page 20 -->

It is not necessarily the case that all interrupt files in a system are the same size (implement the same number of interrupt identities). For a given hart, the interrupt files for guest external interrupts must all be the same size, but the interrupt files at machine level and at supervisor level may differ in size from those of guest external interrupts, and from each other. Likewise, the interrupt files of different harts may be different sizes.

A platform might provide a means for software to configure the number of interrupt files in an IMSIC and/or their sizes, such as by allowing a smaller interrupt file at machine level to be traded for a larger one at supervisor level, or vice versa, for example. Any such configurability is outside the scope of this specification. It is recommended, however, that only machine level be given the power to change the number and sizes of interrupt files in an IMSIC.

## 3.2. MSI encoding

Established standards (in particular, for PCI and PCI Express) dictate that an individual message-signaled interrupt (MSI) from a device takes the form of a naturally aligned 32-bit write by the device, with the address and value both configured at the device (or device controller) by software. Depending on the versions of the standards to which a device or controller conforms, the address might be restricted to the lower 4-GiB (32-bit) range, and the value written might be limited to a 16-bit range, with the upper 16 bits always being zeros.

When RISC-V harts have IMSICs, an MSI from a device is normally sent directly to an individual hart that was selected by software to handle the interrupt (presumably based on some interrupt affinity policy). An MSI is directed to a specific privilege level, or to a specific virtual hart, via the corresponding interrupt file that exists in the receiving hart’s IMSIC. The MSI write address is the physical address of a particular word-size register that is physically connected to the target interrupt file. The MSI write data is simply the identity number of the interrupt to be made pending in that interrupt file (becoming eventually the minor identity for an external interrupt to the attached hart).

By configuring an MSI’s address and data at a device, system software fully controls: (a) which hart receives a particular device interrupt, (b) the target privilege level or virtual hart, and (c) the identity number that represents the MSI in the target interrupt file. Elements a and b are determined by which interrupt file is targeted by the MSI address, while element c is communicated by the MSI data.

> As the maximum interrupt identity number an IMSIC can support is 2047, a 16-bit limit on MSI data values presents no problem.

When the H extension is implemented and a device is being managed directly by a guest operating system, MSI addresses from the device are initially guest physical addresses, as they are configured at the device by the guest OS. These guest addresses must be translated by an IOMMU, which gets configured by the hypervisor to redirect those MSIs to the interrupt files for the correct guest external interrupts. For more on this topic, see Chapter 8.

## 3.3. Interrupt priorities

Within a single interrupt file, interrupt priorities are determined directly from interrupt identity numbers. Lower identity numbers have higher priority.

> Because MSIs give software complete control over the assignment of identity numbers in an interrupt file, software is free to select identity numbers that reflect the relative priorities desired for interrupts.

> It is true that software could adjust interrupt priorities more dynamically if interrupt files included an array of priority numbers to assign to each interrupt identity. However, we believe that such additional flexibility would not be utilized often enough to justify the extra hardware expense. In fact, for many systems currently employing MSIs, it is common practice for software to ignore interrupt priorities entirely and act as though all interrupts had equal priority.

> An interrupt file’s lowest identity numbers have been given the highest priorities, not the reverse order, because it is only for the highest-priority interrupts that priority order may need to be carefully managed, yet it is the low-numbered identities, 1 through 63 (or perhaps 1 through 127), that are guaranteed to exist across all systems. Consider, for example, that an interrupt file’s highest-priority interrupt—presumably the most time-critical—is always identity number 1. If priority order were reversed, the highest-priority interrupt would have different identity numbers on different machines, depending on how many identities are implemented by interrupt files. The ability for software to assign fixed identity numbers to the highest-priority interrupts is considered worth any discomfort that may be felt from interrupt priorities being the reverse of the natural number order.

## 3.4. Reset and revealed state

Upon reset of an IMSIC, all the state of its interrupt files becomes valid and consistent but otherwise UNSPECIFIED, except possibly for the `eidelivery` register of machine-level and supervisor-level interrupt files, as specified in Section 3.8.1.

If an IMSIC contains a supervisor-level interrupt file and software at the attached hart enables S-mode that was previously disabled (e.g. by changing bit S of CSR `misa` from zero to one), all state of the supervisor-level interrupt file is valid and consistent but otherwise UNSPECIFIED. Likewise, if an IMSIC contains guest interrupt files and software at the attached hart enables the H extension that was previously disabled (e.g. by changing bit H of `misa` from zero to one), all state of the IMSIC’s guest interrupt files is valid and consistent but otherwise UNSPECIFIED.

## 3.5. Memory region for an interrupt file

Each interrupt file in an IMSIC has one or two memory-mapped 32-bit registers for receiving MSI writes. These memory-mapped registers are located within a naturally aligned 4-KiB region (a page) of physical address space that exists for the interrupt file, i.e., one page per interrupt file.

The layout of an interrupt-file’s memory region is:

| offset | size | register name |
|---|---|---|
| 0x000 | 4 bytes | `seteipnum_le` |
| 0x004 | 4 bytes | `seteipnum_be` |

All other bytes in an interrupt file’s 4-KiB memory region are reserved and must be implemented as read-only zeros.

Only naturally aligned 32-bit simple reads and writes are supported within an interrupt file’s memory region. Writes to read-only bytes are ignored. For other forms of accesses (other sizes, misaligned

<!-- page 23 ends mid-sentence in the provided chunk -->
