<!-- Page 24 -->
accesses, or AMOs), an IMSIC implementation should preferably report an access fault or bus error but must otherwise ignore the access.

If $i$ is an implemented interrupt identity number, writing value $i$ in little-endian byte order to `seteipnum_le` (Set External Interrupt-Pending bit by Number, Little-Endian) causes the pending bit for interrupt $i$ to be set to one. A write to `seteipnum_le` is ignored if the value written is not an implemented interrupt identity number in little-endian byte order.

For systems that support big-endian byte order, if $i$ is an implemented interrupt identity number, writing value $i$ in big-endian byte order to `seteipnum_be` (Set External Interrupt-Pending bit by Number, Big-Endian) causes the pending bit for interrupt $i$ to be set to one. A write to `seteipnum_be` is ignored if the value written is not an implemented interrupt identity number in big-endian byte order. Systems that support only little-endian byte order may choose to ignore all writes to `seteipnum_be`.

In most systems, `seteipnum_le` is the write port for MSIs directed to this interrupt file. For systems built mainly for big-endian byte order, `seteipnum_be` may serve as the write port for MSIs directed to this interrupt file from some devices.

A read of `seteipnum_le` or `seteipnum_be` returns zero in all cases.

When not ignored, writes to an interrupt file’s memory region are guaranteed to be reflected in the interrupt file eventually, but not necessarily immediately. For a single interrupt file, the effects of multiple writes (stores) to its memory region, though arbitrarily delayed, always occur in the same order as the global memory order of the stores as defined by the RISC-V Unprivileged ISA.

> In most circumstances, any delay between the completion of a write to an interrupt file’s memory region and the effect of the write on the interrupt file is indistinguishable from other delays in the memory system. However, if a hart writes to a `seteipnum_le` or `seteipnum_be` register of its own IMSIC, then a delay between the completion of the store instruction and the consequent setting of an interrupt-pending bit in the interrupt file may be visible to the hart.

## 3.6. Arrangement of the memory regions of multiple interrupt files

Each interrupt file that an IMSIC implements has its own memory region as described in the previous section, occupying exactly one 4-KiB page of machine address space. When practical, the memory pages of the machine-level interrupt files of all IMSICs should be located together in one part of the address space, and the memory pages of all supervisor-level and guest interrupt files should similarly be located together in another part of the address space, according to the rules below.

> The main reason for separating the machine-level interrupt files from the other interrupt files in the address space is so harts that implement physical memory protection (PMP) can grant supervisor-level access to all supervisor-level and guest interrupt files using only a single PMP table entry. If the memory pages for machine-level interrupt files are instead interleaved with those of lower-privilege interrupt files, the number of PMP table entries needed for granting supervisor-level access to all non-machine-level interrupt files could equal the number of harts in the system.

If a machine’s construction dictates that harts be subdivided into groups, with each group relegated to its own portion of the address space, then the best that can be achieved is to locate together the machine-level interrupt files of each group of harts separately, and likewise locate together the supervisor-level and guest interrupt files of each group of harts separately. This situation is further addressed later below.

> A system may divide harts into groups in the address space because each group exists on a separate chip (or chiplet in a multi-chip module), and weaving together the address spaces of the multiple chips is impractical. In that case, granting supervisor-level access to all non-machine-level interrupt files takes one PMP table entry per group.

For the purpose of locating the memory pages of interrupt files in the address space, assume each hart (or each hart within a group) has a unique hart number that may or may not be related to the unique hart identifiers ("hart IDs") that the Privileged Architecture assigns to harts. For convenient addressing, the memory pages of all machine-level interrupt files (or all those of a single group of harts) should be arranged so that the address of the machine-level interrupt file for hart number $h$ is given by the formula $A + h \times 2^C$ for some integer constants $A$ and $C$. If the largest hart number is $h_{max}$, let $k = \lceil \log_2(h_{max} + 1) \rceil$, the number of bits needed to represent any hart number. Then the base address $A$ should be aligned to a $2^{k + C}$ address boundary, so $A + h \times 2^C$ always equals $A \;|\; (h \times 2^C)$, where the vertical bar ($|$) represents bitwise logical OR.

The smallest that $C$ can be is 12, with $2^C$ being the size of one 4-KiB page. If $C > 12$, the start of the memory page for each machine-level interrupt file is aligned not just to a 4-KiB page but to a stricter $2^C$ address boundary. Within the $2^{k + C}$-size address range $A$ through $A + 2^{k + C} - 1$, every 4-KiB page that is not occupied by a machine-level interrupt file should be filled with 32-bit words of read-only zeros, such that any read of an aligned word returns zero and any write to an aligned word is ignored.

The memory pages of all supervisor-level interrupt files (or all those of a single group of harts) should similarly be arranged so that the address of the supervisor-level interrupt file for hart number $h$ is $B + h \times 2^D$ for some integer constants $B$ and $D$, with the base address $B$ being aligned to a $2^{k + D}$ address boundary.

If an IMSIC implements guest interrupt files, the memory pages for the IMSIC’s supervisor-level interrupt file and for its guest interrupt files should be contiguous, starting with the supervisor-level interrupt file at the lowest address and followed by the guest interrupt files, ordered by guest interrupt number. Schematically, the memory pages should be ordered contiguously as

`S, G_1, G_2, G_3, ...`

where $S$ is the page for the supervisor-level interrupt file and each $G_i$ is the page for the interrupt file of guest interrupt number $i$. Consequently, the smallest that constant $D$ can be is $\lceil \log_2(\text{maximum GEILEN} + 1) \rceil + 12$, recalling that GEILEN for each IMSIC is the number of guest interrupt files the IMSIC implements.

Within the $2^{k + D}$-size address range $B$ through $B + 2^{k + D} - 1$, every 4-KiB page that is not occupied by an interrupt file (supervisor-level or guest) should be filled with 32-bit words of read-only zeros.

When a system divides harts into groups, each in its own separate portion of the address space, the memory page addresses of interrupt files should follow the formulas $g \times 2^E + A + h \times 2^C$ for machine-level interrupt files, and $g \times 2^E + B + h \times 2^D$ for supervisor-level interrupt files, with $g$ being a group number, $h$ being a hart number relative to the group, and $E$ being another integer constant $\ge k + \max(C, D)$ but usually much larger. If the largest group number is $g_{max}$, let $j = \lceil \log_2(g_{max} + 1) \rceil$, the number of bits needed to represent any group number. Besides being multiples of $2^{k + C}$ and $2^{k + D}$ respectively, $A$ and $B$ should be chosen so

$$
((2^j - 1) \times 2^E) \;\&\; A = 0 \quad\text{and}\quad ((2^j - 1) \times 2^E) \;\&\; B = 0
$$

where an ampersand (`&`) represents bitwise logical AND. This ensures that

$$
g \times 2^E + A + h \times 2^C \text{ always equals } (g \times 2^E) \;|\; A \;|\; (h \times 2^C),
$$

and

$$
g \times 2^E + B + h \times 2^D \text{ always equals } (g \times 2^E) \;|\; B \;|\; (h \times 2^D).
$$

Infilling with read-only-zero pages is expected only within each group, not between separate groups. Specifically, if $g$ is any integer between 0 and $2^j - 1$ inclusive, then within the address ranges,

$$
g \times 2^E + A \text{ through } g \times 2^E + A + 2^{k + C} - 1,\quad\text{and}
$$

$$
g \times 2^E + B \text{ through } g \times 2^E + B + 2^{k + D} - 1,
$$

pages not occupied by an interrupt file should be read-only zeros.

See also Section 4.9.1 for the default algorithms an Advanced PLIC may use to determine the destination addresses of outgoing MSIs, which should be the addresses of IMSIC interrupt files.

<!-- Page 25 -->

## 3.7. CSRs for external interrupts via an IMSIC

Software accesses a hart’s IMSIC primarily through the CSRs introduced in Chapter 2. There is a separate set of CSRs for each implemented privilege level that can receive interrupts. The machine-level CSRs interact with the IMSIC’s machine-level interrupt file, while, if supervisor mode is implemented, the supervisor-level CSRs interact with the IMSIC’s supervisor-level interrupt file. When an IMSIC has guest interrupt files, the VS CSRs interact with a single guest interrupt file, selected by the VGEIN field of CSR `hstatus`.

For machine level, the relevant CSRs are `miselect`, `mireg`, and `mtopei`. When supervisor mode is implemented, the set of supervisor-level CSRs matches those of machine level: `siselect`, `sireg`, and `stopei`. And when the H extension is implemented, there are three corresponding VS CSRs: `vsiselect`, `vsireg`, and `vstopei`.

As explained in Chapter 2, registers `miselect` and `mireg` provide indirect access to additional machine-level registers. Likewise for supervisor-level `siselect` and `sireg`, and VS-level `vsiselect` and `vsireg`. In each case, a value of the `*iselect` CSR (`miselect`, `siselect`, or `vsiselect`) in the range `0x70-0xFF` selects a register of the corresponding IMSIC interrupt file, either the machine-level interrupt file (`miselect`), the supervisor-level interrupt file (`siselect`), or a guest interrupt file (`vsiselect`).

Interrupt files at each level act identically. For a given privilege level, values of the `*iselect` CSR in the range `0x70-0xFF` select these registers of the corresponding interrupt file:

| `*iselect` value | Register |
| --- | --- |
| `0x70` | `eidelivery` |
| `0x72` | `eithreshold` |
| `0x80` | `eip0` |
| `0x81` | `eip1` |
| ... | ... |
| `0xBF` | `eip63` |
| `0xC0` | `eie0` |
| `0xC1` | `eie1` |
| ... | ... |
| `0xFF` | `eie63` |

Register numbers `0x71` and `0x73-0x7F` are reserved. When an `*iselect` CSR has one of these values, reads from the matching `*ireg` CSR (`mireg`, `sireg`, or `vsireg`) return zero, and writes to the `*ireg` CSR are ignored. (For `vsiselect` and `vsireg`, all accesses depend on `hstatus.VGEIN` being the valid number of a guest interrupt file.)

Registers `eip0` through `eip63` contain the pending bits for all implemented interrupt identities, and are collectively called the `eip` array. Registers `eie0` through `eie63` contain the enable bits for the same interrupt identities, and are collectively called the `eie` array.

The indirectly accessed interrupt-file registers and CSRs `mtopei`, `stopei`, and `vstopei` are all documented in more detail in the next two sections.

<!-- Page 26 -->

## 3.8. Indirectly accessed interrupt-file registers

This section describes the registers of an interrupt file that are accessed indirectly through a `*iselect` CSR (`miselect`, `siselect`, or `vsiselect`) and its partner `*ireg` CSR (`mireg`, `sireg`, or `vsireg`). The width of these indirect accesses is always the current XLEN, 32 bits for RV32 code, or 64 bits for RV64 code.

### 3.8.1. External interrupt delivery enable register (`eidelivery`)

`eidelivery` is a WARL register that controls whether interrupts from this interrupt file are delivered from the IMSIC to the attached hart so they appear as a pending external interrupt in the hart’s `mip` or `hgeip` CSR. Register `eidelivery` may optionally also support the direct delivery of interrupts from a PLIC (Platform-Level Interrupt Controller) or APLIC (Advanced PLIC) to the attached hart. Three possible values are currently defined for `eidelivery`:

```text
0 = Interrupt delivery is disabled
1 = Interrupt delivery from the interrupt file is enabled
0x40000000 = Interrupt delivery from a PLIC or APLIC is enabled (optional)
```

If `eidelivery` supports value `0x40000000`, then a specific PLIC or APLIC in the system may act as an alternate external interrupt controller for the attached hart at the same privilege level as this interrupt file. When `eidelivery` is `0x40000000`, the interrupt file functions the same as though `eidelivery` is `0`, and the PLIC or APLIC replaces the interrupt file in supplying pending external interrupts at this privilege level at the hart.

Guest interrupt files do not support value `0x40000000` for `eidelivery`.

Reset initializes `eidelivery` to `0x40000000` if that value is supported; otherwise, `eidelivery` has an UNSPECIFIED valid value (0 or 1) after reset.

> `eidelivery` value `0x40000000` supports system software that is oblivious to IMSICs and assumes instead that the external interrupt controller is a PLIC or APLIC. Such software may exist either because it predates the existence of IMSICs or because bypassing IMSICs is believed to reduce programming effort.

The `eidelivery` register affects only whether an external interrupt appears in a hart’s `*ip` register (MEI or SEI in `mip` or `sip`, or a bit in `hgeip`) and what the source of such an interrupt may be (either the interrupt file or a separate external interrupt controller such as an APLIC). It has no effect on other state within the interrupt file, or on any `*topei` CSR (`mtopei`, `stopei`, or `vstopei`).

### 3.8.2. External interrupt enable threshold register (`eithreshold`)

`eithreshold` is a WLRL register that determines the minimum interrupt priority (maximum interrupt identity number) allowing an interrupt to be signaled from this interrupt file to the attached hart. If $N$ is the maximum implemented interrupt identity number for this interrupt file, `eithreshold` must be capable of holding all values between 0 and $N$, inclusive.

When `eithreshold` is a nonzero value $P$, interrupt identities $P$ and higher do not contribute to signaling interrupts, as though those identities were not enabled, regardless of the settings of their corresponding interrupt-enable bits in the `eie` array. When `eithreshold` is zero, all enabled interrupt identities contribute to signaling interrupts from the interrupt file.

### 3.8.3. External interrupt-pending registers (`eip0-eip63`)

When the current XLEN = 32, register `eipk` contains the pending bits for interrupts with identity numbers $k \times 32$ through $k \times 32 + 31$. For an implemented interrupt identity $i$ within that range, the pending bit for interrupt $i$ is bit $(i \bmod 32)$ of `eipk`.

When the current XLEN = 64, the odd-numbered registers `eip1`, `eip3`, ... `eip63` do not exist. In that case, if the `*iselect` CSR is an odd value in the range `0x81–0xBF`, an attempt to access the matching `*ireg` CSR raises an illegal instruction exception, unless done in VS-mode, in which case it raises a virtual instruction exception. For even $k$, register `eipk` contains the pending bits for interrupts with identity numbers $k \times 32$ through $k \times 32 + 63$. For an implemented interrupt identity $i$ within that range, the pending bit for interrupt $i$ is bit $(i \bmod 64)$ of `eipk`.

Bit positions in a valid `eipk` register that don’t correspond to a supported interrupt identity (such as bit 0 of `eip0`) are read-only zeros.

### 3.8.4. External interrupt-enable registers (`eie0-eie63`)

When the current XLEN = 32, register `eiek` contains the enable bits for interrupts with identity numbers $k \times 32$ through $k \times 32 + 31$. For an implemented interrupt identity $i$ within that range, the enable bit for interrupt $i$ is bit $(i \bmod 32)$ of `eiek`.

When the current XLEN = 64, the odd-numbered registers `eie1`, `eie3`, ... `eie63` do not exist. In that case, if the `*iselect` CSR is an odd value in the range `0xC1–0xFF`, an attempt to access the matching `*ireg` CSR raises an illegal instruction exception, unless done in VS-mode, in which case it raises a virtual instruction exception. For even $k$, register `eiek` contains the enable bits for interrupts with identity numbers $k \times 32$ through $k \times 32 + 63$. For an implemented interrupt identity $i$ within that range, the enable bit for interrupt $i$ is bit $(i \bmod 64)$ of `eiek`.

Bit positions in a valid `eiek` register that don’t correspond to a supported interrupt identity (such as bit 0 of `eie0`) are read-only zeros.

<!-- Page 27 -->

## 3.9. Top external interrupt CSRs (`mtopei`, `stopei`, `vstopei`)

CSR `mtopei` interacts directly with an IMSIC’s machine-level interrupt file. If supervisor mode is implemented, CSR `stopei` interacts directly with the supervisor-level interrupt file. And if the H extension is implemented and field VGEIN of `hstatus` is the number of an implemented guest interrupt file, `vstopei` interacts with the chosen guest interrupt file.

The value of a `*topei` CSR (`mtopei`, `stopei`, or `vstopei`) indicates the interrupt file’s current highest-priority pending-and-enabled interrupt that also exceeds the priority threshold specified by its `eithreshold` register if `eithreshold` is not zero. Interrupts with lower identity numbers have higher priorities.

A read of a `*topei` CSR returns zero either if no interrupt is both pending in the interrupt file’s `eip` array and enabled in its `eie` array, or if `eithreshold` is not zero and no pending-and-enabled interrupt has an identity number less than the value of `eithreshold`. Otherwise, the value returned from a read of `*topei` has this format:

| Bits | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| 26:16 | Interrupt identity |
| 10:0 | Interrupt priority (same as identity) |

All other bit positions are zeros.

The interrupt identity reported in a `*topei` CSR is the minor identity for an external interrupt at the hart.

> The redundancy in the value read from a `*topei` CSR is consistent with the Advanced PLIC, which returns both an interrupt identity number and its priority in the same format as above, but with the two components being independent of one another.

The value of a `*topei` CSR is not affected by an interrupt file’s `eidelivery` register or by any of `mie`, `sie`, `hie`, `hgeie`, or `vsie`.

A write to a `*topei` CSR claims the reported interrupt identity by clearing its pending bit in the interrupt file. The value written is ignored; rather, the current readable value of the register determines which interrupt-pending bit is cleared. Specifically, when a `*topei` CSR is written, if the register value has interrupt identity in bits 26:16, then the interrupt file’s pending bit for interrupt $i$ is cleared. When a `*topei` CSR’s value is zero, a write to the register has no effect.

If a read and write of a `*topei` CSR are done together by a single CSR instruction (CSRRW, CSRRS, or CSRRC), the value returned by the read indicates the pending bit that is cleared.

> It is almost always a mistake to write to a `*topei` CSR without a simultaneous read to learn which interrupt was claimed. Note especially, if a read of a `*topei` register and a subsequent write to the register are done by two separate CSR instructions, then a higher-priority interrupt may become newly pending-and-enabled in the interrupt file between the two instructions, causing the write to clear the pending bit of the new interrupt and not the one reported by the read. Once the pending bit of the new interrupt is cleared, the interrupt is lost.

If it is necessary first to read a `*topei` CSR and then subsequently claim the interrupt as a separate step, the claim can be safely done by clearing the pending bit in the `eip` array via `*siselect` and `*sireg`, instead of writing to `*topei`.

<!-- Page 28 -->

## 3.10. Interrupt delivery and handling

An IMSIC’s interrupt files supply external interrupt signals to the attached hart, one interrupt signal per interrupt file. The interrupt signal from a machine-level interrupt file appears as bit MEIP in CSR `mip`, and the interrupt signal from a supervisor-level interrupt file appears as bit SEIP in `mip` and `sip`. Interrupt signals from any guest interrupt files appear as the active bits in hypervisor CSR `hgeip`.

When interrupt delivery is disabled by an interrupt file’s `eidelivery` register (`eidelivery = 0`), the interrupt signal from the interrupt file is held de-asserted (false). When interrupt delivery from an interrupt file is enabled (`eidelivery = 1`), its interrupt signal is asserted if and only if the interrupt file has a pending-and-enabled interrupt that also exceeds the priority threshold specified by `eithreshold`, if not zero.

Changes to the state of an interrupt file are guaranteed to be reflected in the relevant interrupt-pending bit in CSR `mip` or `hgeip` eventually, but not necessarily immediately.

A trap handler solely for external interrupts via an IMSIC could be written roughly as follows:

```text
save processor registers
i = read CSR mtopei or stopei, and write simultaneously to claim the interrupt
i = i >> 16
call the interrupt handler for external interrupt i (minor identity)
restore processor registers
return from trap
```

The combined read and write of `mtopei` or `stopei` in the second step can be done by a single CSRRW machine instruction,

```text
csrrw rd, mtopei/stopei, x0
```

where `rd` is the destination register for value $i$.

<!-- Page 31 -->

## Chapter 4. Advanced Platform-Level Interrupt Controller (APLIC)

In a RISC-V system, a Platform-Level Interrupt Controller (PLIC) handles external interrupts that are signaled through wires rather than by MSIs. When the RISC-V harts in a system do not have IMSICs, the harts themselves do not support MSIs, and all external interrupts to such harts must pass through a PLIC. But even in machines where harts have IMSICs and most interrupts are communicated via MSIs, it is not unusual for some device interrupts still to be signaled by dedicated wires. In particular, for devices (or device controllers) that do not otherwise need to initiate bus transactions in the system, the cost of supporting MSIs is especially high, so wired interrupts are a frugal alternative. Wired interrupts also continue to be universally supported by all current computer platforms, unlike MSIs, making another reason for many commodity devices or controllers to choose wired interrupts over MSIs, unless conforming to a standard like PCI Express that dictates MSIs.

This chapter specifies an Advanced PLIC (APLIC) that is not backward compatible with the earlier RISC-V PLIC. Full conformance to the Advanced Interrupt Architecture requires the APLIC. However, a workable system can be built substituting the older PLIC instead, assuming only wired interrupts to harts, not MSIs.

> We intend eventually to provide a free example parameterized implementation of an APLIC, written in portable SystemVerilog, that we expect will be suitable for many RISC-V systems without modification.

> A draft specification exists for a Duo-PLIC that is software-configurable to act as either an original RISC-V PLIC or an APLIC. However, at this time, it appears unlikely that RISC-V International will ever ratify the Duo-PLIC specification as a standard.

In a machine without IMSICs, every RISC-V hart accepts interrupts from exactly one PLIC or APLIC that is the external interrupt controller for that hart. A hart’s external interrupt controller (the PLIC or APLIC) signals interrupts to the hart through a dedicated connection, usually a wire, for each privilege level that the hart may receive interrupts. (Recall Figure 1). A system without IMSICs will typically have only one PLIC or APLIC, serving as the external interrupt controller for all RISC-V harts.

> Because every RISC-V hart without an IMSIC has exactly one PLIC or APLIC as its external interrupt controller, a system with multiple APLICs must partition the harts into disjoint subsets, making each APLIC the external interrupt controller for a separate subset of the harts. While not prohibited, this arrangement is likely to be less efficient than having all harts share a single APLIC.

RISC-V harts that employ IMSICs as their external interrupt controllers can receive external interrupts only in the form of MSIs. In that case, the role of an APLIC is to convert wired interrupts into MSIs for harts. (Recall Figure 2.) The APLIC is said to forward incoming wire-signaled interrupts to harts by sending MSIs to the harts.

When harts have IMSICs to support MSIs, a system may easily contain multiple APLICs for converting wired interrupts into MSIs, with each APLIC forwarding interrupts from a different subset of devices. Multiple APLICs are presumably more likely to arise when groups of devices are physically distant from one another, perhaps even on separate chips (including chiplets in a multi-chip module).

<!-- Page 30 -->
