<!-- 5.4. Interrupts at supervisor level | Page 64 -->

array must be read-only zero as well. The priority number for a supervisor-level external interrupt
(bits 15:8 of `iprio2`) must also be read-only zero. Aside from these two restrictions, implementations
may freely choose which priority number fields are settable and which are read-only zeros.

> *As always, platform standards may require that priorities be configurable for certain interrupt causes.*

> *It is expected that many higher-end systems will not support the ability to configure the priorities of major interrupts at supervisor level as described in this section. Linux in particular is not designed to take advantage of such facilities if provided. The `iprio` array must be accessible but may simply be all read-only zeros.*

The supervisor-level `iprio` array accessed via `siselect` and `sireg` affects the prioritization of
interrupts only when they trap to S-mode. When an interrupt’s priority number in the array is zero
(either read-only zero or set to zero), its priority is the default order from Section 5.1. Setting an
interrupt’s priority number instead to a nonzero value `p` gives that interrupt nominally the same
priority as a supervisor-level external interrupt with priority number `p`. For an interrupt that defaults
to a higher priority than supervisor external interrupts, setting its priority number to a nonzero value
lowers its priority. For an interrupt that defaults to a lower priority than supervisor external interrupts,
setting its priority number to a nonzero value raises its priority. When two interrupt causes have been
assigned the same nominal priority, ties are broken by the default priority order. Table 12 summarizes
the effect of priority numbers on interrupt priority.

If supported, setting the priority number for VS-level external interrupts (bits 23:16 of `iprio2`) to a
nonzero value `p` has the effect of giving the entire category of VS external interrupts nominally the
same priority as a supervisor external interrupt with priority number `p`, when VS external interrupts
trap to S-mode.

Table 12. Effect of the supervisor-level `iprio` array on the priorities of interrupts taken in S-mode. For interrupts
with the same priority number, the default order of Section 5.1 prevails.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>Interrupts with default priority above supervisor external interrupts</th>
      <th>Supervisor external interrupts</th>
      <th>Interrupts with default priority below supervisor external interrupts</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Priority order</th>
      <th>Priority number in supervisor-level `iprio` array</th>
      <th>Priority number from interrupt controller (APLIC or IMSIC)</th>
      <th>Priority number in supervisor-level `iprio` array</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td>Highest</td><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td>…</td><td>…</td><td>…</td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td>254</td><td>254</td><td>254</td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td>255</td><td>255</td><td>255</td></tr>
    <tr><td></td><td></td><td>256 and above (IMSIC only)</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>Lowest</td><td></td><td></td><td>0</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

If bit 9 for a supervisor external interrupt (SEI) is one in `mideleg` or `mvien` and in `mvip`, causing
`sip.SEIP` to be one, but there is no supervisor-level interrupt from the hart’s external interrupt
controller (APLIC or IMSIC), then a priority number for the SEI is not supplied by the external interrupt
controller as usual. In that case, the SEI is assigned a priority number of 256.

If the system has an original PLIC for backward compatibility with older software, reset should
initialize the supervisor-level `iprio` array to all zeros.

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 5.4. Interrupts at supervisor level | Page 65 -->

## 5.4.2. Supervisor top interrupt CSR (`stopi`)

Supervisor-level CSR `stopi` is read-only with width SXLEN. A read of `stopi` returns information
about the highest-priority pending-and-enabled interrupt for supervisor level, in this format:

```text
bits 27:16  IID
bits 7:0    IPRIO
```

All other bits of `stopi` are reserved and read as zeros.

The value of `stopi` is zero unless: (a) there is an interrupt that is both pending in `sip` and enabled in
`sie`, or, if the H extension is implemented, both pending in `hip` and enabled in `hie`; and (b) the
interrupt is not delegated to a less-privileged level (by `hideleg`, if the H extension is implemented).
When there is a pending-and-enabled major interrupt for supervisor level, field IID is the major
identity number of the highest-priority interrupt, and field IPRIO indicates its priority.

If all bytes of the supervisor-level `iprio` array are read-only zeros, a simplified implementation of field
IPRIO is allowed in which its value is always 1 whenever `stopi` is not zero.

Otherwise, when `stopi` is not zero, if the priority number for the reported interrupt is in the range 1 to
255, IPRIO is simply that number. If the interrupt’s priority number is zero or greater than 255, IPRIO
is set to either 0 or 255 as follows:

• If the interrupt’s priority number is greater than 255, then IPRIO is 255 (lowest representable
  priority).
• If the interrupt’s priority number is zero and interrupt number IID has a default priority higher
  than a supervisor external interrupt, then IPRIO is 0 (highest priority).
• If the interrupt’s priority number is zero and interrupt number IID has a default priority lower
  than a supervisor external interrupt, then IPRIO is 255 (lowest representable priority).

> *To ensure that `stopi` is never zero when an interrupt is pending and enabled for supervisor level, if major interrupt 0 can trap to S-mode, it must have a default priority lower than a supervisor external interrupt.*

The value of `stopi` is not affected by the global interrupt enable SIE in CSR `sstatus`.

The RISC-V Privileged Architecture ensures that, when the value of `stopi` is not zero, a trap is taken to
S-mode for the interrupt indicated by field IID if either the current privilege mode is S and
`sstatus.SIE` is one, or the current privilege mode has less privilege than S-mode. The trap itself does
not cause the value of `stopi` to change.

The following pseudocode shows how a supervisor-level trap handler might read `stopi` to avoid
redundant restoring and saving of processor registers when an interrupt arrives during the handling
of another trap (either a synchronous exception or an earlier interrupt):

```text
save processor registers
i = read CSR scause

if (i >= 0) {
    handle synchronous exception i
    restore sstatus if necessary
}
if (sstatus.SPIE == 1) {
    loop {
        i = read CSR stopi
        if (i == 0) exit loop
        i = i>>16
        call the interrupt handler for major interrupt i
    }
}
restore processor registers
return from trap
```

(This example can be further optimized, but with an increase in complexity.)

In order for this algorithm to function correctly, `sstatus.SPIE` must be set to 1 before executing an
SRET that changes the privilege mode.

> *Assuming `sstatus` is saved and restored by trap handlers at entry and exit as is common, it is sufficient to set `sstatus.SPIE = 1` only once, before the first use of SRET that changes privilege mode. After an SRET, a trap back to S-mode will restore `sstatus.SPIE = 1`; and if the trap handler preserves `sstatus`, it will still be true before the next SRET that ends the handler.*

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 5.4. Interrupts at supervisor level | Page 66 -->

## 5.5. WFI (Wait for Interrupt) instruction

The RISC-V Privileged Architecture specifies that instruction WFI (Wait for Interrupt) may suspend
execution at a hart until an interrupt is pending for the hart. The Advanced Interrupt Architecture
(AIA) redefines when execution must resume following a WFI.

According to the base RISC-V Privileged Architecture, instruction execution must resume from a WFI
whenever any interrupt is both pending and enabled in CSRs `mip` and `mie`, ignoring any delegation
indicated by `mideleg`. With the AIA, this succinct rule is no longer appropriate, due to the mechanisms
the AIA adds for virtual interrupts. Instead, execution must resume from a WFI whenever an interrupt
is pending at any privilege level (regardless of whether the interrupt privilege level is higher or lower
than the hart’s current privilege mode).

An interrupt is pending at machine level if register `mtopi` is not zero. If S-mode is implemented, an
interrupt is pending at supervisor level if `stopi` is not zero. And if the H extension is implemented, an
interrupt is pending at VS level if `vstopi` (Section 6.3.3) is not zero.

> *The AIA’s rule for WFI gives the same behavior as the base Privileged Architecture’s rule when `mvien = 0` and, if the H extension is implemented, also `hvien = 0` and `hvictl.VTI = 0`, thus disabling all virtual interrupts not visible in `mip`. (The AIA’s hypervisor registers are covered in the next chapter, "Interrupts for Virtual Machines (VS Level)".)*

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 6.1. VS-level external interrupts with a guest interrupt file | Page 67 -->

# Chapter 6. Interrupts for Virtual Machines (VS Level)

When the H extension is implemented, a hart’s set of possible privilege modes includes the virtual
supervisor (VS) and virtual user (VU) modes for hosting virtual harts. The Advanced Interrupt
Architecture adds to the H extension new interrupt facilities aligned with those described earlier for
supervisor-level interrupts.

As introduced in Chapter 2, several hypervisor and VS CSRs are added: `hvien`, `hvictl`, `hviprio1`,
`hviprio2`, `vsiselect`, `vsireg`, `vstopei`, and `vstopi`. (And for RV32, the following high-half CSRs are
also added: `hidelegh`, `hvienh`, `hviph`, `hviprio1h`, `hviprio2h`, `vsiph` and `vsieh`.) As always, when
executing in VS-mode or VU-mode, the VS CSRs substitute for the corresponding supervisor CSRs.

To give software that runs in a virtual machine the appearance of executing on a real machine that
implements the Advanced Interrupt Architecture at supervisor level, responsibility is shared between
hypervisor software and the hardware facilities described in this chapter. While some behaviors can be
handled directly by hardware, others require significant emulation by the hypervisor, sometimes with
hardware assistance.

## 6.1. VS-level external interrupts with a guest interrupt file

When a hart implements the H extension, it is recommended that the hart also have an IMSIC with
guest interrupt files. Assuming guest interrupt files are available, each can be assigned to a virtual hart
at the physical hart to act as the supervisor-level interrupt file for that virtual hart. If there are N guest
interrupt files, then N virtual harts at that physical hart may each have a physical guest interrupt file
to serve as its (virtual) supervisor-level interrupt file. The guest interrupt file for the current virtual
hart is always indicated by the VGEIN field of CSR `hstatus`. When VGEIN is not the valid number of a
guest interrupt file, the current virtual hart has no guest interrupt file to act as its supervisor-level
interrupt file.

When `hstatus.VGEIN` is the valid number of a guest interrupt file, values of `vsiselect` in the range
`0x70-0xFF` select registers of this guest interrupt file, just as values of `siselect` in the same range
select registers of the IMSIC’s true supervisor-level interrupt file. The registers of an interrupt file that
are accessed indirectly through `vsiselect` and `vsireg` are documented in Chapter 3 on the IMSIC,
along with IMSIC-only CSR `vstopei`. Because all IMSIC interrupt files act identically, the guest
interrupt file that a virtual hart accesses through CSRs `siselect`, `sireg`, and `stopei` is
indistinguishable from a true supervisor-level interrupt file as seen from S-mode (or HS-mode).

In addition to an IMSIC at each hart, a virtual machine may also need to see a PLIC or APLIC.
However, unlike an IMSIC’s ability to provide physical guest interrupt files for virtual harts, a PLIC or
APLIC must be emulated for a virtual machine by the hypervisor.

> *The Advanced Interrupt Architecture does not currently include hardware assistance for virtualizing an APLIC. For small numbers of harts, such hardware would be substantially larger than that required to implement guest interrupt files for an IMSIC. It is assumed that most high-performance I/O can be done through devices that can send MSIs directly to guest interrupt files (such as devices attached through a PCI Express interconnect). For the types of devices whose interrupts must go through a (virtual) APLIC, the overhead cost of emulating the APLIC is expected to be less significant.*

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 6.1. VS-level external interrupts with a guest interrupt file | Page 68 -->

When a virtual hart appears to have an IMSIC because a guest interrupt file is assigned to it, all
external interrupts, real or emulated, destined for the virtual hart must go through this perceived
IMSIC. A hypervisor can easily inject an emulated external interrupt into the guest interrupt file
selected by `hstatus.VGEIN` by setting a bit in the interrupt-pending array indirectly accessed through
`vsiselect` and `vsireg`. When a virtual hart has a guest interrupt file, a hypervisor is not normally
expected to set bit VSEIP in CSR `hvip`.

In the special case that an emulated APLIC for a virtual machine has a wired interrupt source that
equates to an actual interrupt source of a real APLIC, if software running in this virtual machine
configures its virtual APLIC to forward interrupts from that source as MSIs to a specific virtual hart,
the hypervisor can configure the real APLIC to forward the actual interrupts directly as MSIs to the
virtual hart’s guest interrupt file. In this way, although the hypervisor must trap and emulate the
virtual machine’s memory accesses that configure the forwarding of interrupts at the virtual APLIC,
the interrupts themselves can be converted automatically into real MSIs for the guest interrupt file,
without the hypervisor being invoked for each arriving interrupt.

### 6.1.1. Direct control of a device by a guest OS

To ensure proper support for interrupts, two conditions must be met before a hypervisor may allow a
guest OS running in a virtual machine to directly control a physical device that sends MSIs: First, each
virtual hart must have a guest interrupt file assigned to it, giving each its own apparent IMSIC within
the virtual machine. Second, interrupts from the device must be signaled by wire through an APLIC
that can translate these interrupts into MSIs, or the system must have an IOMMU that can translate
the addresses of MSI memory writes made by the device itself.

If a guest OS directly controls a device capable of sending MSIs, it will naturally configure MSIs at the
device with the guest physical addresses the OS sees for the IMSICs of its virtual harts, not knowing
that these addresses are only virtual. When the device performs a memory write for an MSI, the
destination address of this write must be translated by the IOMMU from the guest physical address
assigned by the guest OS into the true physical address of the target guest interrupt file, using a
translation table supplied by the hypervisor.

By design, the translation an IOMMU must do for device MSIs is fundamentally no different than the
address translation the IOMMU already must perform for other memory accesses from the same
device, converting guest physical addresses into true physical addresses. Because each virtual hart is
assigned a dedicated, physical guest interrupt file that is indistinguishable from a true supervisor-level
interrupt file, no translation is needed for the data of an MSI write, which specifies the interrupt’s
identity number in the target interrupt file.

### 6.1.2. Migrating a virtual hart to a different guest interrupt file

When it is necessary to move a virtual hart from one physical hart to another, if the virtual hart uses a
guest interrupt file, the specific guest interrupt file assigned to it must change from the one in use at
the old physical hart to a different one at the new physical hart. Because each guest interrupt file is
physically tied to a single physical hart, a virtual hart cannot bring its guest interrupt file with it when
it moves.

The process of migrating a virtual hart from one guest interrupt file to another is more complex than
moving most other state held by the virtual hart. After the destination guest interrupt file has been
chosen at the new physical hart, the following steps are recommended:

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 6.2. VS-level external interrupts without a guest interrupt file | Page 69 -->

1. At the old interrupt file, save to memory the values of registers `eidelivery` and `eithreshold`, and
   set `eidelivery = 0`.
2. At the new interrupt file, set `eidelivery = 0`, and zero all implemented interrupt-pending bits (the
   `eip` array).
3. Modify the relevant translation tables at all IOMMUs so that MSIs for this virtual interrupt file are
   now sent to the new physical interrupt file. Likewise, if any interrupts at an APLIC are forwarded
   by MSIs to the old interrupt file, reconfigure the APLIC to send them to the new interrupt file. As
   needed, synchronize with all IOMMUs and APLICs to ensure that no straggler MSIs will arrive at the
   old interrupt file after this step. Synchronizing with an APLIC can be accomplished using the
   algorithm of Section 4.9.3.
4. At the old interrupt file, dump to memory all implemented interrupt-pending and interrupt-
   enable bits (the `eip` and `eie` arrays). After this step is done, the old interrupt file is no longer in use.
5. At the new interrupt file, logically OR the interrupt-pending bits that were saved in step 4 into the
   new interrupt file, using instruction CSRS to write to the `eip` array. Also, load the interrupt-enable
   bits that were saved in step 4 into the `eie` array.
6. At the new interrupt file, load registers `eithreshold` and `eidelivery` with the values that were
   saved in step 1.

Resuming execution of the virtual hart at the new physical hart is not recommended until the entire
interrupt file has been fully migrated.

> *Resuming execution of the virtual hart before the interrupt file is fully migrated could allow software running in the virtual machine to see multiple MSIs arriving from a single device in an order that should not happen. While this would rarely matter in practice, it runs the risk of wedging a device driver that depends (perhaps inadvertently) on a valid ordering of events.*

<!-- 6.2. VS-level external interrupts without a guest interrupt file | Page 69 -->

## 6.2. VS-level external interrupts without a guest interrupt file

Although it is recommended that harts implementing the hypervisor extension also have IMSICs with
guest interrupt files, this is not a requirement. Even assuming guest interrupt files exist, it may happen
that there are more virtual harts at a physical hart than guest interrupt files, leaving some virtual harts
without one. In either case, a hypervisor must emulate an external interrupt controller for a virtual
hart without the benefit of a guest interrupt file allocated to the virtual hart.

When emulating an external interrupt controller for a virtual hart, if configurable interrupt priority is
not supported for the virtual hart other than for external interrupts, then external interrupts may be
asserted to VS level simply by setting bit VSEIP in `hvip`, as defined by the H extension. However, to
emulate both an external interrupt controller and priority configurability for non-external interrupts,
a hypervisor must make use of CSR `hvictl` (Hypervisor Virtual Interrupt Control), described later in
the next section.

## 6.3. Interrupts at VS level

### 6.3.1. Configuring priorities of major interrupts at VS level

Like for supervisor level, the Advanced Interrupt Architecture optionally allows major VS-level

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 6.3. Interrupts at VS level | Page 70 -->

interrupts to be configured by software to intermix in priority with VS-level external interrupts. As
documented in Section 5.4, interrupt priorities for supervisor level are configured by the `iprio` array
accessed indirectly through CSRs `siselect` and `sireg`. The `siselect` addresses for the `iprio` array
registers are `0x30-0x3F`.

VS level has its own `vsiselect` and `vsireg`, but unlike supervisor level, there are no registers at
`vsiselect` addresses `0x30-0x3F`. When `vsiselect` has a value in the range `0x30-0x3F`, an attempt from
VS-mode to access `sireg` (really `vsireg`) causes a virtual instruction exception. To give a virtual hart
the illusion of an array of `iprio` registers accessed through `siselect` and `sireg`, a hypervisor must
emulate the VS-level `iprio` array when accesses to `sireg` from VS-mode cause virtual instruction
traps.

Instead of a physical VS-level `iprio` array, a separate hardware mechanism is provided for configuring
the priorities of a subset of interrupts for VS level, using hypervisor CSRs `hviprio1` and `hviprio2`. The
subset of major interrupt numbers whose priority may be configured in hardware are these:

| Major interrupt number | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | Supervisor software interrupt |
| 5 | Supervisor timer interrupt |
| 13 | Counter overflow interrupt |
| 14-23 | *Reserved for standard local interrupts* |

For interrupts directed to VS level, software-configurable priorities are not supported in hardware for
standard local interrupts in the range 32-48.

> *For custom interrupts, priority configurability may be supported in hardware by custom CSRs, expanding upon `hviprio1` and `hviprio2` for standard interrupts.*

Registers `hviprio1` and `hviprio2` have these formats:

`hviprio1`:

```text
bits 7:0    Reserved for priority number for interrupt 0; reads as zero
bits 15:8   Priority number for interrupt 1, supervisor software interrupt
bits 23:16  Reserved for priority number for interrupt 4; reads as zero
bits 31:24  Priority number for interrupt 5, supervisor timer interrupt
bits 39:32  Reserved for priority number for interrupt 8; reads as zero
bits 47:40  Priority number for interrupt 13, counter overflow interrupt
bits 55:48  Priority number for interrupt 14
bits 63:56  Priority number for interrupt 15
```

`hviprio2`:

```text
bits 7:0    Priority number for interrupt 16
bits 15:8   Priority number for interrupt 17
bits 23:16  Priority number for interrupt 18
bits 31:24  Priority number for interrupt 19
bits 39:32  Priority number for interrupt 20
bits 47:40  Priority number for interrupt 21
bits 55:48  Priority number for interrupt 22
bits 63:56  Priority number for interrupt 23
```

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->

<!-- 6.3. Interrupts at VS level | Page 71 -->

Each priority number in `hviprio1` and `hviprio2` is a WARL unsigned integer field that is either read-
only zero or implements a minimum of IPRIOLEN bits or 6 bits, whichever is larger, and preferably all
8 bits. Implementations may freely choose which priority number fields are read-only zeros, but all
other fields must implement the same number of integer bits. A minimal implementation of these
CSRs has them both be read-only zeros.

A hypervisor can choose to employ registers `hviprio1` and `hviprio2` when emulating the (virtual)
supervisor-level `iprio` array accessed indirectly through `siselect` and `sireg` (really `vsiselect` and
`vsireg`) for a virtual hart. For interrupts not in the subset supported by `hviprio1` and `hviprio2`, the
priority number bytes in the emulated `iprio` array can be read-only zeros.

> *Providing hardware support for configurable priority for only a subset of major interrupts at VS level is a compromise. The utility of being able to control interrupt priorities at VS level is arguably illusory when all traps to M-mode and HS-mode—both interrupts and synchronous exceptions—have absolute priority, and when each virtual hart may also be competing for resources against other virtual harts well beyond its control. Nevertheless, priority configurability has been made possible for the most likely subset of interrupts, while minimizing the number of added CSRs that must be swapped on a virtual hart switch.*

> *Major interrupts outside the priority-configurable subset can still be directed to VS level, but their priority will simply be the default order defined in Section 5.1.*

If a hypervisor really must emulate configurability of priority for interrupts beyond the subset
supported by `hviprio1` and `hviprio2`, it can do so with extra effort by setting bit VTI of CSR `hvictl`,
described in the next subsection.

### 6.3.2. Virtual interrupts for VS level

Assuming a virtual hart does not need configurable priority for major interrupts beyond the subset
supported in hardware by `hviprio1` and `hviprio2`, a hypervisor can assert interrupts to the virtual
hart using CSRs `hvien` (Hypervisor Virtual-Interrupt-Enable) and `hvip` (Hypervisor Virtual-Interrupt-
Pending bits). These CSRs affect interrupts for VS level much the same way that `mvien` and `mvip` do for
supervisor level, as explained in Section 5.3.

Each bit of registers `hvien` and `hvip` corresponds with an interrupt number in the range 0-63. Bits
12:0 of `hvien` are reserved and must be read-only zeros, while bits 12:0 of `hvip` are defined by the H
extension. Specifically, bits 10, 6, and 2 of `hvip` are writable bits that correspond to VS-level external
interrupts (VSEIP), VS-level timer interrupts (VSTIP), and VS-level software interrupts (VSSIP),
respectively.

The following applies only to the CSR bits for interrupt numbers 13-63: When a bit in `hideleg` is one,
then the same bit position in `vsip` is an alias for the corresponding bit in `sip`. Else, when a bit in
`hideleg` is zero and the matching bit in `hvien` is one, the same bit position in `vsip` is an alias for the
corresponding bit in `hvip`. A bit in `vsip` is read-only zero when the corresponding bits in `hideleg` and
`hvien` are both zero. The combined effects of `hideleg` and `hvien` on `vsip` and `vsie` are summarized in

<!-- The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International -->
