<!-- page 89 -->

8.5. MSI page tables | Page 88

> Typically, NPPN will be the page address of an IMSIC’s interrupt file in the real machine, and NID will be the interrupt identity to make pending in that interrupt file to indicate that the destination MRIF may have changed. However, NPPN is not required to be a valid interrupt file address, and an IOMMU must not attempt to restrict it to only such addresses. Any page address must be accepted for NPPN.

Memory accesses by I/O devices to addresses within a page covered by an MRIF-mode PTE are handled by the IOMMU instead of being passed through to the memory system. If a memory access, read or write, is not for 32 bits of data, or if the access address is not aligned to a 4-byte boundary (including accesses that straddle the page boundary), the access should be aborted as unsupported. For a naturally aligned 32-bit read, the IOMMU should preferably return zero as the read value but may alternatively abort the access. A naturally aligned 32-bit write is either interpreted as an MSI, resulting in an update of the destination MRIF, or is discarded.

When the IMSIC interrupt files in the system implement memory-mapped register `seteipnum_be` for receiving MSIs in big-endian byte order (Section 3.5), then an IOMMU must be able to store MSIs in both little-endian and big-endian byte orders to the destination MRIF. If the IMSIC interrupt files in the system do not implement register `seteipnum_be`, an IOMMU should ordinarily store only little-endian MSIs to the destination MRIF. The data of an incoming MSI is assumed to be in little-endian byte order if bit 2 of the destination address is zero, and in big-endian byte order if bit 2 of the destination address is one.

If a naturally aligned 32-bit write is to guest physical address `A` within a page covered by an MRIF-mode PTE, and if the write data is `D` when interpreted in the byte order indicated by bit 2 of `A`, then the write is processed as follows: If either `A[11:3]` or `D[31:11]` is not zero, or if bit 2 of `A` is one and big-endian MSIs are not supported, then the incoming write is accepted but discarded. Else, the original incoming write is recognized as an MSI and is replaced by one of the following memory accesses, setting the interrupt-pending bit that corresponds to the interrupt identity `D` in the destination MRIF to one:

- an atomic AMOOR operation, if atomic updates are supported; or
- a non-atomic read-modify-write sequence, if atomic updates are not supported.

Once the MRIF update operation is visible to all agents in the system, the 11-bit NID value is zero-extended to 32 bits, and this value is written to the address `NPPN<<12` (i.e., physical page number `NPPN`, page offset zero) in little-endian byte order.

> While IOMMUs are expected typically to cache MSI PTEs that are configured in basic translate mode (`M = 3`), they might not cache PTEs configured in MRIF mode (`M = 1`). Two reasons together justify not caching MSI PTEs in MRIF mode: First, the information and actions required to store an MSI to an MRIF are far different than normal address translation; and second, by their nature, MSIs to MRIFs should occur less frequently. Hence, an IOMMU might perform MRIF-mode processing solely as an extension of cache-miss page table walks, leaving its address translation cache oblivious to MRIF-mode MSI PTEs.

The RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture | © RISC-V International
